WSN BLE examples (#1)
netd-tud/riot-exercises: 11-BLE-peripheral/README.md

# BLE peripheral

> To achieve Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) communication, RIOT uses NimBLE (an open-source BLE stack). This is a simple example to achieve the peripheral role on a BLE device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To achieve Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) communication, RIOT uses [NimBLE](https://github.com/apache/mynewt-nimble) (an open-source BLE stack). This is a simple example to get RIOT to be a BLE peripheral.
```

```Makefile
# Some RIOT modules needed for this example
USEMODULE += random
USEMODULE += ztimer_sec

# Include NimBLE
USEMODULE += nimble_svc_gap
USEMODULE += nimble_svc_gatt
```

Some devices or RIOT versions may need a specific `CFLAG`. It is already in the [`Makefile`](./Makefile) of this example. You can comment it out to see if the BLE communication is impacted or not.
```Makefile
# It depends on RIOT version, if the following CFLAG is needed
# Use the high frequency crystal oscillator
# This is needed for the BLE stack to work properly
# Specifically on the feather-nrf52840-sense board
CFLAGS += -DCLOCK_HFXO_ONBOOT=1
```

To change to this directory from a different exercise, use the following command in the terminal.

```sh
$ cd ../11-BLE-peripheral
```

## Preparation
**1. Flash the current example onto the board, by the following command.**
```
$ make flash
```

**2. Start a terminal to see the output information from the board. Flexibly use the terminal and `printf` to see what the board is doing with BLE.**
```
$ make term
```

> **3. Download and install `nRF Connect for Mobile` app on your phone.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**3. Download and install the [nRF Connect for Mobile](https://www.nordicsemi.com/Products/Development-tools/nRF-Connect-for-mobile) app on your phone.**
```

> **4. Use the `scan` function in `nRF Connect for Mobile` to observe the BLE signals in the air, and other functions to play with BLE communication. Flexibly use the app to interact with your board, and check if certain functions have been properly implemented.**

Reviewer: This is missing the expected BLE peripheral name. For some reason it doesn't show up for me :smiling_face_with_tear:

Reviewer: Oh, that's expected I guess, from seeing Task 1. Should be rephrased then.

Author: Added a short sentence to explain.

## Task 1
**Enable the advertisement for the peripheral board by implementing the following code.**

```C
int rc;
rc = ble_gap_adv_set_fields(&fields);
assert(rc == 0);
rc = ble_gap_adv_start(addr_type, NULL, 100,
                        &adv_params, peripheral_conn_event, NULL);
assert(rc == 0);
```

The above code completes the `advertise()` function in the example.

> - `ble_gap_adv_set_fields()` configures the fields to include in BLE advertisements.

Reviewer: I'd expect some explanation on what those `fields` are in general, and in this specific example code.

Author: Some explanations and specific explanations to the example code are added.

- `ble_gap_adv_start()` configures and starts advertising procedure for BLE.

> **Hints:** Check the terminal and `nRF Connect for Mobile` app. Try to make a connection between `nRF Connect for Mobile` and your BLE application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Hints:** Check the terminal and "nRF Connect for Mobile" app. Try to make a connection between "nRF Connect for Mobile" and your BLE application.
```

I wouldn't use backticks (preformatted style) for the app name everywhere in this README.

Reviewer: Also, I cannot read the "Device Name", "Appearance" and "Central Address Resolution" in the app, is that expected?

Reviewer: That's on "Server", I guess it makes sense to also give a short recap what "Client" and "Server" is in BLE, and why actually "Client" is interesting here.

## Task 2

> **Add our custom service (already well defined in the example) and reload the GATT server through the following code.**

Reviewer: What is a "service"? What is a GATT server? (looking through BLE-newcomers-eyes)

Author: Extra explanation has been added.

> **Add our custom service (already well defined in the example) and reload the GATT server through the following code.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Add our custom service (already defined in the example) and reload the GATT server through the following code.**
```

```C
/* Add our custom services */
rc = ble_gatts_count_cfg(gatt_svr_svcs);
assert(rc == 0);
rc = ble_gatts_add_svcs(gatt_svr_svcs);
assert(rc == 0);

/* Reload the GATT server to link our added services */
rc = ble_gatts_start();
assert(rc == 0);
```

BLE allows the developers to define custom services and characteristics for their own applications. However, these custom services and characteristics will not be automatically added or loaded by the BLE stack. Thus, these commands are needed to achieve so.

- `ble_gatts_add_svcs()` adds a set of self-defined services.
- `ble_gatts_start()` makes all added services available to other BLE devices.

> The difference can be seen in the `nRF Connect for Mobile` app after connecting to the BLE application.

Reviewer: Maybe explain a bit better where we can see the difference and what we can do with it.

Author: A short explanation has been added.

## Task 3
**Check if someone subscribed to our custom characteristic by adding the following code.**

```C
case BLE_GAP_EVENT_SUBSCRIBE:
    notify_state = event->subscribe.cur_notify;
    if (notify_state == 1) {
        printf("Peripheral: Someone subscribed to our custom characteristic\n");
    } else {
        printf("Peripheral: Someone unsubscribed from our custom characteristic\n");
    }
    return 0;
```

> The BLE stack uses `BLE_GAP_EVENT_SUBSCRIBE` to link and show subscribe events happened in a BLE connection. Hence, by checking it within `peripheral_conn_event()` function, any subscribe events and their related information can be found.

Reviewer: In general I'd always put the explaining text first, and then the task to do (the code to copy) afterwards. Also here, a reminder of what characteristic / subscription is would probably be helpful.

Author: Done

> The terminal can tell if the subscription is successful or not.

Reviewer: How do I subscribe in the app?

Author: Added an explanation.

## Task 4
**Achieve a periodic notification in the `while` loop inside the `main()` function through the following code.**

```C

> uint8_t custom_notify_data[5];

Reviewer: Why using an array of 5? Is that some minimum requirement? If so, I'd at least have the whole array randomly filled instead of repeating the same byte 5 times. Might also warrant an explanation.

Author: An explanation has been added.

uint8_t random_data = random_uint32_range(0, 256);
printf("Peripheral: data --> ");
for (uint8_t i = 0; i < sizeof(custom_notify_data); i++) {
    custom_notify_data[i] = random_data;
    printf("%02x ", custom_notify_data[i]);
}
printf("\n");
/* Send notification */
struct os_mbuf *om = ble_hs_mbuf_from_flat(custom_notify_data, sizeof(custom_notify_data));
ble_gatts_notify_custom(conn_handle, custom_notify_data_val_handle, om);
```

- `ble_hs_mbuf_from_flat()` puts the data in a buffer.
- `ble_gatts_notify_custom()` sends a characteristic notification.

After implementing all the four tasks correctly, you should see data notification through the `nRF Connect for Mobile` app. The received data should be the same as the one printed in the terminal.

> In BLE, notification is one of the mechanisms for a peripheral to send data to a central device. It is commonly used, so we introduce it here. Other possible mechanisms are indication, read, and write, but they are not further discussed in this example.

Reviewer: This should be above, as said before.

Author: Done

> 

Reviewer: I'd add 1-2 extra tasks, integrating the new knowledge about BLE with knowledge from previous steps. For example, send the temperature from SAUL as a notification. (Without code snippets, students should find out by themselves.)

Author: This will be part of the project
